---
categories:
- chess
comments: true
date: 2016-01-09T12:08:32-05:00
layout: post
title: "If you were this old man playing chess against a young boy, what would you have done?"
---
I'm going to tell you a true story about an old man and a young boy
(age under 10) who played a game of chess in a competitive tournament
where prize money was at stake. I'd like you to think about the odd
situation that occurred, while looking at it, with *empathy*, from
different points of view:

- the old man
- the young boy
- the boy's parent
- the tournament director, whose job is to enforce the official
[US Chess Federation rules of tournament chess](http://www.uschess.org/content/view/7864/221/)
- the bigger picture of the chess community
- the biggest picture of life lessons

Given the whole story, do you think that what happened was right?
Is there something you would have done differently if you had been one
of the actors in the story? In particular, what would you have done as
the old man?

<!--more-->

## Prelude

Let's call the old man Mr. M, the boy B, the tournament director T.

In the beginning of the second half of a long tournament, Mr. M and B
were paired against each other. Neither had been doing too well in the
tournament up till that point, but there was the rest of the
tournament to go, and anything can happen in a long tournament. Mr. M
on paper had the highest US chess rating of their shared class
division going into the tournament and so was the favorite to win. B
was a young newcomer to chess who had only been playing for half a
year but was improving rapidly.

It turned out during the game that B played extremely well, outplaying
Mr. M. The position was complicated but B had an advantage. B thought
he spotted a winning move, and carelessly (still being young and
impulsive, unfortunately) *picked up one of his pieces* in order to
make the winning move, but in mid-air realized it was not going to
win.

## Touch-move

The [touch-move](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touch-move_rule) rule
in chess is one of the most important rules that exists in serious
tournament chess. If you touch your own piece with *intent* to move
it, or touch an opponent's piece with *intent* to capture it, then you
have to complete your move using the touched piece one way or another.

Violating touch-move is very common among young chess players in a
casual setting, and therefore a critical bad habit to break, as B
learned the hard way in this game.

## Where to move it?

However, since B was still in mid-air, he did not have to complete the
move he was going to play. He did have to complete some legal move
using his touched piece, which he still held. At this point, he
*intended* to put the piece back on its *original* square, as is legal
to do so, to think of what move to make with the piece.

Unfortunately, in confusion, B accidentally released the piece on a
random other square rather than the original square. This was really
bad luck because the move that was thereby *determined* by the
release.

## The old man's decision

Since Mr. M knew as well as B did that B did not intend to release the
piece on the absurd square it was released at, he decided to allow B
to return the piece to the original square in order to make a
different legal move. Very charitable!

But then Mr. M suddenly changed his mind and said the accidentally
determined move had to stand. The tournament director was called and
ruled that according to the rules, indeed the move had to stand: the
piece was released on a legal square.

B's parent did not contest the ruling, because it was by the book, and
the result was that Mr. M captured B's piece and quickly won the game,
because the rest of the game was nonsensical given the nonsensical
move B was forced to play.

## Your reaction?

**Given this information, how do you feel about what happened? Rules
  are rules, but Mr. M had the power to insist on strict enforcement
  or to overlook the unintended violation, and originally intended to
  let it go.**

My first reaction when learning about this story was anger that Mr. M
had changed his mind like that. If Mr. M had taken one course of
action or the other, *without suddenly changing his mind*, I would
have been OK with that. Either be forgiving or play by the book, but
be consistent!

My second reaction, was from the point of view of what this
incident meant for B in the long run. I had some conflicting feelings:

- I felt bad about B being forced to lose an important game in which
  he was playing some of the best chess he had ever played in his
  life.
- I was annoyed that B still hadn't mastered "touch-move", and felt
  that he needed to *learn a lesson* that would help him avoid such
  carelessness in his future chess tournaments, and this was a
  legitimate case of his learning an important lesson.
- I worried about how B would feel about this loss, given that he had
  started off the tournament pretty badly and was just getting his
  momentum back by the second half.

## Complications

But this wasn't the whole story. The other thing Mr. M did when
explaining why he changed his mind was that he wanted to win the game
and the tournament (recall that he was in a worse position against B,
and hadn't been doing so well in the tournament despite being the
highest rated player in the section). So his concern wasn't about
strictly enforcing the rules; presumably if he already had a
tournament win locked up and this game didn't "matter", he would have
been "charitable" and allowed B to continue.

**Does this change how you feel about what happened?**

For me, Mr. M's justification made me actively dislike him. At the
same time, maybe B learned an additional life lesson in this
tournament, that adults will do whatever is in their own interest and
any generosity offered may be contingent on whether it impacts their
own interest.

## The end result

Some rounds later, the tournament was complete. It turned out that
Mr. M won all subsequent games he played in the tournament, and
therefore won the tournament, along with the prize money for first
place, $500. He achieved his goal, fulfilling his justification for
being firm in his game against B. So from his point of view, he made
the right decision and got his moment of glory.

B bounced back from his disaster and also won his remaining games, and
ended up with a pretty successful tournament overall. You could say
that although it was unfortunate that his touch-move slip might have
cost him first place, he learned a lot about taking touch-move
seriously and about recovering from unfortunate incidents during a
chess tournament. So from B's point of view, he probably learned a lot
more from Mr. M's adherence to the rules than if Mr. M had been too
nice.

## Conclusion

Although I don't like how Mr. M went about what he did, the end result
seems actually optimal for everyone involved. Or was it?

## Appendix

I've written in the past about some life lessons I learned from chess
as a child. I'm curious how B will look back at his incident later in
life.

- [Life lessons I learned from a lunch recess chess game at age seven](/blog/2012/05/30/life-lessons-i-learned-from-a-lunch-recess-chess-game-at-age-seven)
- [Why I am grateful that my father never let me win a chess game against him](/blog/2012/06/03/why-i-am-grateful-that-my-father-never-let-me-win-a-chess-game-against-him)
